hello this is Eric bolt from the
National Weather Service in Oxnard
California here is a quick look at the
El Nino Southern Oscillation status and
predictions for the upcoming 2014 and 15
winter season for Southwest California
we are currently in an El Nino watch the
ocean is reflecting El Nino conditions
that we're still waiting for the
atmosphere to respond it's likely that L
media will develop by fall the strength
of El Nino however this winter remains
uncertain the typical El Nino pattern
looks like this when the warmer ocean
water shifts eastward across the
subtropical Pacific Ocean the jet stream
taps into moist storm systems enhanced
by the warm waters and these systems
then track across the southern sections
of the country more northern latitudes
are typically warmer and drier than
normal during an El Nino pattern this is
a look at sea level heights from the
NASA Jason satellite the heights
correspond with sea surface temperature
and give an idea of warm or cold
anomalies the latest image from late
August on the right shows a slight
increase in temperatures along the
equator compared to the late June image
on the left sea surface temperatures
were above average across the eastern
equatorial Pacific Ocean during the last
four weeks in addition temperatures
remain well above average over the North
Pacific which has changed little since
last winter season see temperatures
below the surface at a depth of several
hundred feet have warmed again across
the equatorial Pacific as depicted by
the progression of images from top to
bottom this is a sign that el nene i may
be strengthening at this time a
consensus prediction between scientists
at the Climate Prediction Center and the
International Research Institute at
Columbia University shows that the
chance of an El Nino this winter has
dropped from eighty percent to
sixty-five percent since the August
update the latest El Nino model forecast
project many different outcomes
by the spaghetti effects shown above the
current reading is below 0 point 5
degrees on the left and the range of
outcomes keeps the El Nino mainly in a
weak to moderate category through next
winter historically in Southwest
California we have seen an increase in
above normal rainfall during El Nino
winters compared with Lonnie Nia and
ENSO neutral winters the probability of
above normal rainfall during week and
moderate El Nino events ranges from
forty-one percent in santa maria in the
middle pie chart to fifty three percent
in los angeles on the left this is based
on a total of 17 weak to moderate El
Nino since 1950 the important fact to
remember is that the odds of a dryer the
normal winter are just as high as a
wetter than normal winter during weak to
moderate events here is the latest CPC
temperature predictions for the January
through March 2015 time frame there is
no significant signal of either above or
below normal temperatures for Southwest
California the precipitation prediction
for the January through March 2015 time
frame though Southwest California with
an above normal precipitation potential
this upcoming winter season this
forecast is based on classical Nene o
trends of weather storms across the
southern tier of the country here are
the conclusions about El Nino this
winter El Nino is likely but the
strength is uncertain at this time
chances of above normal rainfall
increases during an El Nino compared to
other years cal nino does not being
greater storm intensity weak to moderate
El Ninos have resulted in large extremes
across Southern California either dry or
wet an example for downtown Los Angeles
we had 3.21 inches in the 2006 07 years
versus 37 point 0 6 inches in the 2004
oh five years flooding is typically
caused by back-to-back storms in a year
whether it's la ninia El Nino or neutral
conditions thank you for watching this
presentation if you have any comments or
questions please contact me and remember
to visit our website for the latest
forecasts watches
or warnings